# Introduction

##  What is TSP?

Tcl Static Prime (TSP) is a compiler for the Tcl langauge that produces C or Java code, which 
is then compiled on-the-fly during execution of a Tcl program.  TSP compiles selected 
Tcl *procs*, not an entire program.   TSP can speed up procs by several orders of magnitude,
at a slight cost in Tcl language features.  Procs that are not able to be compiled due to
unsupported features are instead defined as normal Tcl procedures as a fallback for normal execution.
The TSP compiler is written entirely in Tcl, with support libraries written C and Java.
TSP uses the Tcl extension *tclparser* for low level command and expression parsing.  
TSP uses the *hyde* extension for compiling Java when used with JTcl, and the *critcl*
extension for compiling C when used with C/Tcl.


## Statically defined native types

TSP achieves much of its performance increases due to use of natives types. Integers are defined
as native 64-bit integer types, doubles as 64 bit double types, booleans as target language 
appropriate types (int or boolean).  Strings are stored as dynamically sizeable types or 
structures (with library support).  Tcl objects (var type) are also used for non-native 
types, such as lists and dicts.  The only variables that are explicitly given to the 
Tcl interpreter for storage and management are arrays, whose elements are already Tcl Objects.  

## TSP annotations for proc and variable definitions

The use of native types requires that the programmer define variable usage through use of
compile time annotations in the form of Tcl comments.  Besides defining
variable types, Tcl procs are also annotated to define the return type of the proc and the 
type of proc arguments.  Since TSP type annotations are in the form of comments,
they can be added to existing Tcl procs without affecting existing code.

TSP can infer certain type usage and will caused variables to be typed accordingly.  Procedure
arguments and variables that whose type is not defined and cannot be inferred are defined
as 'var'.

## Subset of Tcl language

TSP also requires that a subset of the Tcl language be used to compile procs.  This is required
to that the TSP compiler can easily track type information of variables and proc.  Perhaps the 
most significant limitation is Tcl expression syntax found in the expr, if, and while commands.
TSP requires that nested commands and array references be moved out of the expression, and all
variables used in the expression must be defined as native types (boolean, int, or double).

TSP also acheives higher performance by avoiding invocation of the Tcl interpreter.  This has a 
few implications that may subtlebly alter customary Tcl semantics.  First, since typed variables are not
stored in the interpreter, variable read and writes will not normally trigger a 'trace' that may
have been defined for a variable (array types are an exception, since they are stored in the
interpreter.)  Second, Tcl bultin commands (set, puts, list, etc.) are either directly compiled 
into native code or are invoked directly.  Redefinition of builtin commands (via 'rename') is
not recoginized by TSP compiled procs; the original builtin command is always invoked.  Third, TSP
procs may only be defined in the global namespace ('::').  
   
## Use of profiler to target procs

TSP is best used selectively.  Since even in the most basic of programs, a significant portion of code
is executed only once, or even just a few times during the lifetime of a program.  In a typical 
"80% : 20%" scenario, the bulk of program execution time is likely attributed to perhaps just 
20% of the actual code.  Likely candidate procs are those that perform math operations or loop 
over one or more lists of items.  Profiling Tcl programs is a better way to select procs for 
TSP compilation.  Since TSP compiles at the proc level, profilers that also gather performance 
metrics as the proc level are ideal.

## Importance of Unit testing and argument checking

Another factor to consider when using TSP is unit testing of procs that are compiled, and those uncompiled
procs that invoke the compiled procs.  Since TSP is more sensitive to mis-matched data types than standard
Tcl, unit testing helps to locate code that may otherwise cause Tcl exceptions to be thrown.  For example,
a Tcl proc may expect an integer argument, and will only raise an exception when that variable is used
by a command that expects an integer (for example, the "incr" command).  TSP instead will raise 
an error immediately when the proc is invoked.  This requires that the invoking code to: a) ensure
that the proper type (or one that can be converted to the type) is passed to the compiled proc, or
b) catch the Tcl error tha can be generated by a failed conversion.

